generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  THE FORWARD PASS
  IN FOOTBALL.


  BY
  ELMER BERRY, B.S., M.P.E.

  _Head Coach Football and Baseball, Associate Director
  Physical Department, Professor Physiology and Physiology
  of Exercise, International Young Men's Christian
  Association College, Springfield, Mass._


  NEW YORK
  A. S. BARNES AND COMPANY
  1921



  COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY
  A. S. BARNES AND COMPANY




  THIS WORK IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED
  TO
  Dr. J. H. McCurdy
  FORMER COACH
  SPRINGFIELD Y. M. C. A. COLLEGE FOOTBALL TEAMS,
  THE MAN WHO EARLIEST DEVELOPED THE FORWARD PASS,
  FOR TWENTY-FIVE YEARS A SUCCESSFUL COACH
  AND
  A STANDARD-BEARER OF CLEAN SPORT





CONTENTS


                                                          PAGE

  CHAPTER I
      THE COMING OF THE FORWARD PASS                         1

  CHAPTER II
      LEGAL RESTRICTIONS RELATIVE TO THE FORWARD PASS        4

  CHAPTER III
      THE SPIRAL PASS FROM CENTER                            6

  CHAPTER IV
      THE TECHNIQUE OF FORWARD PASSING                       8

  CHAPTER V
      FUNDAMENTALS OF THE SUCCESSFUL FORWARD PASSING GAME   11

  CHAPTER VI
      SUGGESTIVE FORWARD PASS FORMATIONS AND PLAYS          19

  CHAPTER VII
      DEFENSE FOR THE FORWARD PASS                          23




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                          PAGE

  FIG. 1. PUNT FORMATION PASS                               19

  FIG. 2. UNDESIRABLE PASS                                  20

  FIG. 3. SPRINGFIELD-CARLISLE INDIAN PASS                  21

  FIG. 4. SPREAD FORMATION PASS                             21

  FIG. 5. OPEN DEFENSE                                      24




THE FORWARD PASS IN FOOTBALL




CHAPTER I.

THE COMING OF THE FORWARD PASS.


INTRODUCTION.

The history of football has been a story of limiting the power of the
offense. The defense has never been restricted, never curtailed, never
hampered, always free to line up as it chose, to go when it pleased
(barring offside), where it pleased and do practically as it pleased.
Always the offense has been too strong, too powerful, and there has been
the necessity of legal restrictions directed toward equalizing the
attack and defense. This was true in general up to the "revolution" when
ten yards and the forward pass came and the "new" game was created.

With the forward pass a great, new, unknown offensive weapon was
provided. The history of the game since the granting of this new method
of attack has again been chiefly a story of limiting the power and
effectiveness of this new offense. To be sure minor changes in the rules
have had other motives and objectives, but taking it by and large the
statement is true to fact.

A brief review of the conditions of the "old" game will recall to
players and spectators of that period the situation, and perhaps help
all of us to better appreciate and understand the changes that brought
the "new" game.

Mass plays predominated. Possession of the ball was vastly important.
Five yards were to be made in three downs. If a man six feet tall could
fall forward his full length three times he would make six yards and
first down. Consequently "fall forward," "get your distance," were
slogans of the old game. End runs, though they might occasionally
succeed brilliantly, were apt to lose precious distance that could not
be regained. If a team won the toss and took the ball there was
practically nothing but a fumble between them and a touchdown, and games
between evenly matched teams were often really decided by the luck of
the toss at the beginning of the game. For with even weight and
particularly with a slight advantage of weight in the line, a safe,
conservative game, straight ahead, slow but sure, tackle to tackle,
hammer the weak spot, was sure to bring the ultimate touchdown. All
sorts of ingenious formations were devised for massing power on the weak
spot. The famous "guards back" of Pennsylvania, the "flying wedge" of
Deland of Harvard, the "turtle back" wedge of others, the rolling mass
on tackle and others of this type will bring a smile of reminiscence to
"old-timers." Men were pushed, dragged and hauled along by their team
mates. Often special straps were attached to the uniform to facilitate
this work, and even to make possible throwing a man bodily, feet first,
over the prostrate lines.

Doubtless many men were severely injured by the splendid co-operative
efforts of their own team mates in such activity. Such a game meant
pounding--pure, unadulterated, gruelling pounding--until the selected
spot, groggy and exhausted, gave way and the opponents swept through to
victory or a substitute leaped in to fill the breach. Men came out of
such games in those days bruised and exhausted, no definite injury but
"dead," "all in." They were worse the next day and still worse the next,
dragging back ready for another gruelling pummelling by the following
Saturday. Internal injuries often developed and an unwarranted large
number of deaths occurred. The game was too rough; dangerously rough;
unnecessarily rough.

Closely linked with this aspect of the "old" game was the moral problem.
Everything was hidden in the mass play. Spectators could see little of
the real game, nothing of the "dirty work." Much of it could not be seen
even by the officials. Publicity is a great deferrent to unfairness. No
man wants the spectators in the stands to see him "pull" any "raw
stuff." Close lines, petty irritations and difficulty of detection
tempted many a man to foul play. We would like to think that the
cleanness and high standard of sportsmanship of the new game is an
indication of rising character and realization of ethical values of
sport. Doubtless it is, but at the same time no small part of it is due
to the openness of the new game; the fact that not only officials but
spectators can see most of what happens. The brutality of the old game,
the deaths and injuries from it, its moral effect, and finally even its
lack of interest to spectators, led to a general outcry against
football. There was a wide demand that it be abolished as an
intercollegiate sport. In 1906 a conference was called in New York for
this purpose. Representatives from approximately seventy colleges
attended.

Fortunately for American youth there were in the conference men of
vision who saw the real need of the hour. These men urged that the
difficulty was not with football but with the _way_ in which it was
allowed to be played; that the college faculties were themselves
responsible for the condition in that they had given no adequate
supervision to athletics; that the game should not be abolished but
revised. They contended that a new game should and could be produced
that would be more open, less dangerous and more interesting than the
old game. Their counsels ultimately prevailed and the conference that
had met to _abolish_ football formed what has become the National
Collegiate Athletic Association, an organization that has done a
wonderful work in raising the standards of sport in our American
colleges. The conference appointed a football rules committee, which,
amalgamating if possible with the old football rules committee, was to
adopt rules that would revise the game of football--that would make it a
_new game_.

What should be done to produce a more open, less dangerous, more
interesting game of football? Remember that the old mass game had
resulted from five yards in three downs. The first fundamental
suggestion was the requirement of _ten_ yards to gain. This could never
be made by mass attack. Consequently the forward pass was given to the
offense--practically the one great occasion of legislation favoring the
offense. In 1912 a fourth down was added. With ten yards in four downs
and the forward pass as the fundamentals the modern game of football has
been developed. Other changes, often important and far-reaching in
influence, followed, but they followed naturally, logically, almost
unavoidably, once the fundamentals, ten yards and the forward pass, had
been accepted.




CHAPTER II.

LEGAL RESTRICTIONS RELATING TO THE FORWARD PASS.


The first suggestion of a recognition by the football rules committee of
any need of a more open game came in 1903. Between the twenty-five yard
lines seven players of the offense were required on the line of
scrimmage and the first man receiving the ball from the snapper-back
might run with it provided he crossed the scrimmage line five yards out
from center (Football Guide for 1903, pp. 127 and 142). Between the
twenty-five-yard line and the goal, however, only five men were required
on the line of scrimmage. In that case, however, restrictions were
adopted requiring the men to be back five yards or outside the end men.
In 1904 came the "checker board" field.

With 1906 came the great revolution and the adoption of the new game;
two lines of scrimmage, six men regularly on the line of scrimmage,
center trio back five yards if not on the line of scrimmage, ten yards
in three downs and the Forward Pass. It is with the last that we are
concerned. (Football Guide for 1906, pp. 95 and 121.)

At first one forward pass could be made by any player anywhere behind
his line of scrimmage to any player on the end of the line or one yard
back of it provided the pass crossed the line five yards out from
center. It was completed if _touched_ by any eligible player before it
touched the ground. Any illegal pass went to the opponents at the spot
from which the pass was made. A forward pass over the goal line became a
touch back.

Naturally a period of intensive experimentation followed. In 1907 the
loss of the ball on first and second down was changed to a loss of
fifteen yards. (Football Guide for 1907, pp. 137 and 168.) In 1908 the
recovery of the touched ball was restricted to the eligible man who had
first touched it on penalty of going to the opponents at the spot. Also
the penalty for ineligible men touching the ball was increased to loss
of the ball at spot where the pass was made (Football Guide for 1908,
pp. 181 and 214).

Nineteen ten and twelve brought the legal changes that largely completed
the new game. In 1910 the four periods were adopted, the longitudinal
lines were omitted, and a pass and kick were both required to be made
from five yards behind the line of scrimmage. A twenty-yard zone beyond
which the pass could not go was instituted. This was dropped again in
1912, the end zone was added so that a team could score on a pass, the
field shortened to three hundred yards and the fourth down added. By
many this was regarded as a direct blow to the forward pass as it was
supposed that it would mean an attempt at and a possibility of making
the distance by the old line bucking methods. This was regarded as in
line with the restrictive action of 1911, by which a pass touching the
ground either before or after being legally touched was ruled as
incompleted. Whatever the intention of the originators may have been the
fourth down has worked quite as advantageously to the new game as the
old, in that it has given quarterbacks an additional down with which to
experiment and to take chances.

The changes relating to the forward pass since 1912 have been mostly of
minor significance. The restriction requiring the kicker to be back five
yards was removed in 1913, the forward passer was protected from being
roughed up in 1914 and a ten-yard penalty for intentional grounding of a
forward pass was imposed. The forward pass out of bounds was ruled
incompleted in 1915. Relatively little change occurred during the war
period and there has been a feeling since that experimentation has gone
far enough; that the game is very good as it is, and that coaches,
players and the public generally should have a chance to thoroughly
acquaint themselves with the present possibilities. The open game has
come to stay, and attempts to further restrict it have met with strong
opposition.




CHAPTER III.

THE SPIRAL PASS FROM CENTER.


Possibly many would not recognize the necessity for a discussion of the
spiral pass from the snapper-back in a presentation of the forward pass.
Without this spiral pass, however, a successful forward passing game is
greatly handicapped if not rendered absolutely ineffective. The reasons
for this will be presented in a later chapter. Suffice it here to say
that the writer regards a good fast, accurate, true spiral pass from the
snapper-back, that can be shot back speedily and accurately to a
distance of at least fifteen yards, as absolutely indispensable to a
successful forward passing game. Ability to get such a pass is not
possessed by every center, nor by every team even among the better
colleges. This failure is due first to a lack of appreciation of its
importance, and second to an inability to teach centers how to acquire
this art.

The following method of teaching this pass has been found effective:

First: Have the candidate make an ordinary underhand spiral pass
forward. This is so simple and common that almost every player does it
automatically. Have him notice what he does. Notice how the ball is held
as it swings forward past the hip. The hand is bent inward almost at
right angles to the forearm. Now as the ball is shot forward from the
hand a peculiar _pulling_, _lifting_ motion is made. This motion imparts
the rotation to the ball and produces the spiral. This is the
fundamental part of the action. Essentially the same action must now be
secured with a backward pass.

Second: Have the candidate make an ordinary underhand spiral pass
_backward_. To many players this will at first seem awkward and they may
be unable to control either the direction or the rotation of the pass.
It is not necessary to continue with this until it is mastered, but some
practice on it is helpful. Proceed soon to the third step.

Third: Take position as a center, right leg back for a right hander,
swing the ball freely between the legs with the right hand, and make a
backward spiral pass between the legs. Work on this until a regular
spiral is secured.

Fourth: Still swing the ball freely from the ground but place the left
hand against the ball, pressing it more firmly against the forearm and
guiding the direction of the ball. The right hand may now be a little
farther forward on the ball.

Fifth: When the above has been mastered take position as in the fourth
step, then bending a little more in the hips and knees place the ball,
without changing position of the hands, so that it touches the ground
well out in front. When ready pull the ball powerfully with the right
hand, guiding with the left, and shoot it back at the chest of the
catcher, at first about seven yards back. Follow through with the right
hand and as the ball leaves the hand give the pulling, lifting snap
described above in number one which produces the real spiral. Great care
must be taken to see that the right hand is kept far enough _under_ and
_around_ the ball. As soon as the player begins to lay it on the ground
he almost invariably forgets to pass the hand far enough around it.
Consequently he loses his rotation and the pass becomes "wobbly" and
inaccurate.

Taught in this way many men acquired the idea of the spiral pass from
center with great ease. Extended and constant practice, however, is
necessary to insure a consistent and accurate performance that can be
depended upon under fire--the accomplishment fundamental to the forward
pass.

Some men master a very successful backward spiral pass from center with
one hand. The principle of this pass is essentially the same as that of
the closed grip overhand pass described later in the chapter on
technique of passing. It requires a large hand and perhaps a certain
amount of natural "knack." It is dangerous and less effective with a wet
ball, but with a dry ball ability to pass in this way with one hand
often adds greatly to the offensive strength of the center.




CHAPTER IV.

TECHNIQUE OF THE FORWARD PASS.


The execution of a good spiral forward pass is a thing of real beauty
and art. It holds the eye of spectators and players alike. It is to
football what the home run is to baseball. The soaring flight of a
sixty-yard spiral is like the rushing swoop of the daring aviator in its
charm and interest. To produce it the player must have a good arm,
master the knack of it and give long and earnest practice.

Practically all passes of more than five yards are executed as spirals.
These are of three types, the underhand, the overhand with closed grip
and the overhand with open grip.


THE UNDERHAND SPIRAL.

This is valuable for short distances where a quick pass is desired. Its
execution is so easy and common that no further comment is needed beyond
what has already been said in connection with the first part of teaching
the spiral pass from center, (page 6).


THE OVERHAND CLOSED GRIP SPIRAL.

This pass is theoretically the correct and logical manner of executing a
distance (over ten yards) pass. The ball is laid over into the palm of
the right hand (for a right-hander) with the fingers along and somewhat
behind the lacing of the ball, the thumb on the opposite side. The
position of the hand depends largely on its size. The smaller the hand
the nearer the end of the ball it must go and the more difficult it is
to retain the ball in the grasp. This type of pass is therefore
difficult for men with small hands and with a wet and muddy ball. In
making the throw the arm should be drawn backward _over_ the shoulder,
not down around as in a baseball throw. The nose, _i.e._, the forward
point of the ball, should be well elevated and the ball is then shot
forward past the ear at its objective. The motion is somewhat like that
of a pitcher, when pitching from the shoulder without the "wind-up,"
with a runner on first. As the ball leaves the hand the rotation is
given by a sharp pull _downward_ and _inward_. The most common fault and
cause of failure with this pass is that the nose of the ball is not kept
up during the forward motion of the arm. To do this the elbow must be
kept fairly close to the body and the little finger side of the hand
kept _up_. This gives a rather constricted position for throwing and
most men at first feel unable to get the desired distance. This comes,
however, as one acquires the knack of the snap and the follow through
with the body. When developed and mastered this pass gives wonderful
accuracy, great speed and can be shot directly to the receiver without
much elevation. It is therefore less likely to be intercepted and is an
ideal pass particularly for shorter distances up to thirty yards and for
dry days.


THE OVERHAND OPEN SPIRAL.

This pass is made in general in the same way as the closed grip spiral,
but the thumb lies alongside or near the fingers and the hand is open,
the ball lying in the palm of the hand. It is held in position as the
throw is made by the centrifugal force of the swing. In making this pass
a bigger swing may be used, more comparable to a "wind-up" delivery, and
consequently greater distance and greater height may be secured. The
ball can be literally "heaved" out and passes of fifty to sixty yards
are easily possible. The greatest difficulty in the execution of this as
in the closed grip pass is to keep the nose of the ball up. This can be
accomplished, however, without bringing the hand in so closely as in the
other, thus allowing opportunity for more individual peculiarities.
Players therefore usually learn this pass easier than the other, and
because of its greater usefulness with a wet and slippery ball is the
pass now most commonly used. Its chief disadvantage is the greater
height which it usually requires. This tends to increase the danger of
interception.


RECEIVING THE FORWARD PASS.

Although a great deal of practice is usually given to receiving forward
passes, often very little actual coaching is given on the correct form.

Every receiver should be notified by some method just _before_ a pass is
made to him. At this signal the receiver should turn toward the point to
which the pass is supposed to be made. This should be known on all
forward pass plays. The receiver and ball should then meet at this
point, the receiver on the dead run and somewhat sideward to the ball.
It will occasionally happen, but should rarely be necessary, for the
receiver to take a pass from directly behind or even very much over one
shoulder. He should, however, be able to do it when necessary.

The actual catching of the pass is not essentially different from
catching a punt or any ordinary pass. One hand should be used to guide
the ball into the body, one hand should be kept well under the ball, the
elbows should be kept close and the ball always be brought in _against
the body_ and held securely against any possible attack.




CHAPTER V.

FUNDAMENTALS OF A SUCCESSFUL FORWARD PASSING GAME.


The forward pass has now been a part of offensive football for fifteen
years. In spite of that fact few teams have developed anything like a
consistently successful ground gaining forward pass attack. Apparently
many regard the forward pass simply as a valuable threat, something for
occasional use, something to take a chance with, something the
possibility of which makes the _real_ game still workable. To a large
degree this has been the attitude of the larger colleges. In general
they have frowned on the forward pass; opposed it, sneered at it, called
it basketball and done what they could to retard its adoption. It has
taken away from them the advantage of numbers, weight and power, made
the game one of brains, speed and strategy--even if you please like
baseball, luck,--rendered the outcome of their _practice_ games with
smaller colleges uncertain. Why should they have hastened its
development? Rather it has been the smaller colleges that have found in
the forward pass their opportunity, which have developed its
possibilities until now the larger ones as well are turning to it as the
final means of winning their big game.

It is doubtless fair to say that the early development of the forward
pass was largely due to two teams, Springfield College of the Y. M. C. A.
and the Carlisle Indians. Their game in 1912 at Springfield is said by
competent experts to have been probably the greatest exhibition of open
football ever staged. It is doubtful if two such finished exponents of
the open game have ever met before or since. To Coach J. H. McCurdy of
the Springfield team goes the honor, in the writer's judgment, of the
early recognition and development of the strategy of the forward pass,
for in this respect at least, Springfield excelled even the wonderful
Indian teams produced by Glen Warner. No one team can longer claim a
leadership in this or any other department of the game, but it is fair
to say that the Springfield team has continuously demonstrated an
unusual aptitude for the forward pass and a high degree of leadership at
least among the Eastern teams.

It is not strange, in view of the fact that the great leaders of
football have not taken more kindly to the forward pass, that its
underlying principles have not been more thoroughly worked out and
organized. It is the chief purpose of this work to state if possible
some of these principles and fundamentals to the end that the open game
of football, always in the past and still to some extent opposed by
certain groups, may be better understood, more successfully coached and
more firmly and thoroughly established.


REGULAR GROUND GAINING PLAY.

The first fundamental of a successful forward passing game is that the
forward pass should be used as a _regular ground gaining_ play and not
simply, as so many teams seem still to do, as a sort of last desperate
chance. With many teams the attack may be summarized practically in this
manner: first and second down, runs; third down, forward pass; fourth
down, kick. And then they wonder that the forward pass doesn't succeed
and stigmatize it as a dangerous, treacherous and unsuccessful play!
Rather a team must have the confidence to use it often on first and
second downs, and even on special, occasions on a fourth down. Not only
that, but it must be used frequently, persistently and continuously.
Nothing more disturbs the morale of defense than a series of forward
passes, some of which succeed even though a considerable proportion of
them are incompleted. There is always the danger that one may succeed
and get away! What proportion of the running plays are successful in the
modern game? No statistics exist. If the forward pass were tried
anything like as persistently as the running game, unquestionably its
percentage of success would greatly increase.

On this basis the pass should be used for short as well as long gains. A
running play that gains two and a half to three yards is regarded as
successful. Why should not the pass be used in the same way? Passes that
give little or no gain in themselves, but put the receiver in position
for open field running, and at least a few yards gain, disorganize the
defense, eventually make the long passes successful, spread the defense
so bucking becomes possible, and contribute generally to making the
forward pass a regular ground gaining play--a part of the regular
attack.


PASSER WELL BACK.

The early successes of the forward pass were secured almost solely upon
the principle of putting the passer a distance of fifteen yards back,
then letting the opposing line come charging through absolutely without
resistance. Practically the whole offensive team was sent down to
receive (apparently) the pass, thus confusing the defense as to who was
eligible and furnishing interference as soon as the pass was completed.
By actual experiment it was found that a distance of thirteen to fifteen
yards was necessary. Although lines are more wary and experienced today
than formerly, this single piece of strategy is still very valuable.
Many teams are failing with their passes simply because their passer is
not more than seven to ten yards back. The greater distance gives a
short but _vital_ length of time for receivers to get free and for the
passer to pick out the open man. It also gives a longer time for running
sideward and forward, helping to confuse the defense as to whether a run
or pass is really intended. Add to this the fact that with the greater
distance back little or no protection need be given the passer, it
becomes clear that though many plays can and will be built with the
passer up close and running back only the necessary legal distance, a
big distance back is an important fundamental.

This at once brings out the importance of the spiral pass back from
center, and the ability to make, when desired, a long forward pass of
from fifty to sixty yards. Unless the snapper-back can make a
consistent, accurate, speedy pass to a distance of fifteen or more yards
and can accurately _lead_ his passer, no advantage is gained by this
distance back. Many teams have failed to put their passer the necessary
distance back because, though they did not recognize the real
difficulty, their center was not adequately getting the ball back to
him. Consequently the passer was instinctively creeping up closer and
closer, being hurried in his passes and often failing. The spiral pass
back from center is an absolutely fundamental requisite for a successful
forward passing game.

The ability also to make long passes is fundamental. With the secondary
defense playing ten yards back and possibly covering twenty yards more,
with the passer fifteen yards behind his own offensive line, the pass
going outward at an angle must often travel fifty-five yards to clear
the secondary defense. Although such long passes need not often be used,
the knowledge that the offense possesses the ability to make them is
necessary to keep the secondary defense back so that short, sharp passes
may succeed for the disconcerting gains of the regular ground gaining
attack.


KICK, RUN OR PASS POSSIBLE.

The ideal forward pass formation is one from which a kick, pass or run
is possible. As the play starts it should be difficult to diagnose
whether a run or pass is intended. In fact, as a team becomes finished
in its performance it may often switch in its intention, running out a
play on the call of the passer that was intended for a pass, because the
defense laid back and waited; and conversely, though not so often, a
pass may be made to an open man on the call of the passer, though the
signal called for a run. This represents high art in team work but it
can be developed. Much depends upon the alertness and head work of the
passer in this connection. Such changing of plan should not be allowed
in the early season, but it may be encouraged later as the team becomes
unified and comes to know itself. Such a combination, operating with
basketball intuition, becomes exceedingly difficult to stop.

If in addition to this a kick is occasionally worked on something
besides the fourth down, the game becomes a real test of wits.

Naturally not every forward pass will be "pulled" from an ideal
formation. Many splendid forward pass plays can be built up from
ordinary close running, bucking formations.


ALL ELIGIBLE MEN OPEN--"CHOICE" VS. "MECHANICAL" METHOD.

An occasional forward pass play is developed where only a single
eligible man is open to receive the pass. Such a play depends for
success upon its speed of execution, its unexpectedness and its
similarity to other regularly used running plays. A few such plays
should of course be included in the team's attack, but they are the
exception and when successful are so because of that fact. They the more
strongly emphasize the fact that as a general principle a regular
forward pass play should aim to get as many eligible men as possible
open to receive the pass. These men should be so spread that they cannot
all be covered by the defense. The passer then selects an open man or
the _best_ open man to whom to pass.

This method puts great responsibility upon the passer. It fits in with
the idea of putting him well back and giving him as much time as
possible to make his choice. It requires a passer of special mental
type, and one of considerable basketball ability who can dodge and get
his pass off accurately even when apparently covered. The ease of choice
can be much facilitated by having an order for each play in which the
passer is to look for possibilities. The first choice should always be
the signal called. That play should always be made if it is at all
possible; in early season and during practice it should be executed
whether possible or not. But as the passer develops ability he should be
allowed when the pass signalled is covered to select second, third and
even fourth choices, and the order of looking for the choices should be
so arranged that a quick sweep of the field in front of him will give
the passer his open men.

Not all coaches agree to the principle outlined above. Many have had
difficulty in finding passers who could make the choice required. They
have felt, therefore, that plays had to be designed to special men,
calling these men to special zones, one time one place, next time
another place, and then the play made as quickly as possible to this
special man. If the defense was confused and the man got loose, the play
succeeded (barring mechanical failure); if he did not it failed. This
represents a purely mechanical method. It harks back to the "old" game
where everything was as mechanical as possible and there was little need
of brain power and little occasion to make quick decisions. The quarter
made the decisions; the player did _what he was told to do_. The new
open game is not played that way; it opens up a world of choice and
possibility to the player. Therein lies its greatly increased mental
value.

The big reason that many coaches have failed with the "choice" method
of passing is that their plays have not been so designed as to give
their passer the necessary time for making a choice. They have allowed
the defense to "hurry" the passer. Some of the methods of preventing
this have already been indicated. Occasionally it may happen that a team
possesses a passer of great ability who cannot work the "choice" method.
For such a player "mechanical" plays must be built. But the
probabilities are that many men would develop this ability if they were
given practice and the opportunity.


CALL THE RECEIVER BEFORE PASSING.

It seems a very simple matter to say that the receiver should be called
_before_ the pass is made to him. It seems so simple that time is rarely
spent in practicing it. It is assumed that it will be done, but in
reality it is _not_ done. The usual thing is for the passer to hurl the
ball into the air and yell "ball." Let any coach actually insist once on
his passer calling his man _before_ he passes to him and see what
happens. And yet this is exactly the thing that will change the forward
pass game from a happy-go-lucky chance into a mathematical probability.
When the passer calls his man _before_ he passes he knows what he is
trying to do, the team knows, the receiver is given more time to get
into position, he is then given a better chance to catch the pass and
the rest of the team are given a chance to form interference. It is a
small thing to count as heavily as it does, but it is one of the small
things that make success.


KNOW WHERE THE RECEIVER IS TO GO.

Have it clearly worked out on every pass play where each eligible man is
to go. This is equally true in fact for every man on the team, for
_every man on the team has something to do on a forward pass_. It is
just as important on a forward pass play that each eligible man know
where, when and how he is to go as it is on running plays for the
interference to know whom they are to take. This is where the mechanical
part of the "choice" method of passing comes in. To a surprising degree
this can be almost the same on all plays. It will of course vary
somewhat with the style of defense met, but again surprisingly little.

The eligible man should seldom go directly to the spot where he will
receive the pass if it comes to him. At the proper instant, which should
be pretty definitely timed for everybody on each play, and always at the
call of the passer, the receiver should turn and race to the spot where
he knows the ball will be thrown. This spot should have been previously
worked out so that the passer "leads" the receiver, the latter being in
better position to catch the ball and on the dead run. This should also
be so worked out and the preliminary run of the eligible man such, that
the receiver will get the ball with his body between the ball and his
covering opponent. Receiver and opponent should never be crashing
_together_ when struggling for a ball. It is not only dangerous but poor
strategy.

In working out the above possibilities some eligible men may often be
used simply as decoys going perhaps almost straight toward the defensive
halves and forcing them to cover them, making other eligible men more
surely available for the pass. In case the defensive halves, however,
refuse to cover these decoys, they should immediately be given the pass.
Between combinations of this sort and the problem of determining whether
a pass or run is in process, the position of defensive half in modern
football is one compared with which the "dizzy corner" in baseball is a
bed of roses. The fact is that a team with anything like a mechanical
perfection in the passing game, and any ability to select its men as
above indicated, simply cannot be stopped in mid-field. The greatest
single fault and the one thing that stops most teams, outside of
mechanical failure, is the failure of eligible men to spread widely
enough. Too often two or three eligible men go to the same zone or area
and a pass to any one of the three can be covered by a single defensive
player. Instinctively every man on the offense tries to be where he
expects the ball to go. It must be drilled into the players that their
"business" may be decidedly elsewhere.


INTERFERENCE.

Finally, plan definitely for interference after the pass is completed.
This is particularly true for the shorter passes. Insist that every man
is in every pass play. There is great temptation for linemen to "take a
day off" when a long pass is called in which they are not likely to
figure. But they should either be protecting the passer, making it
possible for him to better choose his open man, or down with the
eligible men in the shorter zones ready for immediate interference in
case that pass should be elected. This should be definitely mapped out
with each formation and the receiver should know where to find
interference behind which he can dodge the instant he has received the
pass.


INTERCEPTION.

The danger of interception, though much over-rated by many, should be
carefully guarded. The interception of a long pass often means nothing
worse than punting to the other team would have meant. Possession of the
ball does not count for as much as in the old game. It should never mean
worse if the danger of interception is properly guarded. Too often,
however, it means a touchdown for the defense.

In the first place when the receiver has been called every other man on
the offense should instantly become alive as a possible interferer or
possible protector in case of interception. It is a preparedness, mental
and physical, that is desired that in itself would probably prevent half
of the touchdowns now made by interception. A pass doesn't _finish_ a
play, it simply starts it--and it may _start it either way_.

In the second place all line men and eligible men in the shorter zones,
who perhaps can be of no assistance on the longer pass, should the
instant they find the long pass in process act as if they expected it to
be intercepted.

Finally the passer himself and his immediate protectors should, the
instant the pass is off, cover for possible interception. They are the
last and possibly by far the most important "safety" in case of
interception.




CHAPTER VI.

SUGGESTIVE FORWARD PASS FORMATIONS AND PLAYS.


The previous chapter attempted a general statement of the fundamental
principles upon which a successful forward passing game may be built. It
is the purpose here to illustrate these by definite formations and plays
that have been successfully used. The kick formation has lent itself in
many ways very admirably to forward passing. A slightly modified punt
(Fig. 1) formation, in which the left end is one yard back, one half on
the line, full fifteen yards back, halves about three yards back, has
proven effective for line bucking, end running right or left, punting
and forward passing. The greatest difficulty lies in getting the left
half to go out straight to the side and be content with a short gain.
When this happens a few times someone from the defense is bound to try
to cover him. When that is attempted the way is open for runs or passes
to left end or tackle. This sideward threat, almost a pure lateral pass,
is an important part of the strategy of the successful forward pass
attack. Note in the play the direction and turning of other eligible
players, the position of line men for interference in case of a short
pass over center or outward to the wide man and the general protection
for possible interception.

[Illustration: FIG 1.--Punt Formation Pass.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Undesirable Pass.]

A quick shift of left end to the line and right half one yard back (or
even played as it is) gives an equally good formation for run or pass to
the right, the corresponding players going to the corresponding
positions and everybody swinging and turning toward the right.

Against this type of play contrast the above (Fig. 2) which, though it
has often proven surprisingly successful, seems to the writer to violate
most of the principles above outlined. The ends coming in are at no
advantage over the defense. The halves going outward have no
interference and there is almost no defense for possible interception.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Springfield-Carlisle Indian Pass.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Spread Formation Pass.]

One of the earliest successful forward pass formations was a widespread
one devised and used by Dr. J. H. McCurdy of the Springfield team in
the Springfield-Carlisle Indian game of 1912 (Fig. 3). In this the line
was spread out practically across the whole field. It was used for
kicking as well, and the whole line was sent down to stop the wonderful
Thorpe. The play was good enough to produce twenty-four points against
the wonderful Indian team of that year, although the game was won by the
Indians 30-24.

The play is given here partly because of its historical value, but also
because the principle is still good.

Spread formations somewhat modified from the above are still proving
very successful, the following serving to again illustrate the
principles of the preceding chapter (Fig. 4).

In this formation tackles are out seven to ten yards, halves about three
yards back and full is back thirteen to fifteen yards. From this
formation line bucks, end runs, double pass end runs, kicks and forward
passes may be used. Quick variations may also be made to make tackles
eligible if desired.

The formations outlined will doubtless sufficiently illustrate the
principles discussed. There is no limit to the possibilities. The kick
and spread formations here given alone possess sufficient possibilities
for a team's entire season's repertoire of open plays. A common mistake
is to attempt too large and varied an assortment of these plays.




CHAPTER VII.

DEFENSE FOR THE FORWARD PASS.


There is no defense for the forward pass. In reality the pass cannot be
prevented, particularly in the center of the field. Yet from the
unwillingness of some of the great football leaders to adopt this style
of game one would infer that it is a worthless game, difficult to
succeed with and easy of defense. This is the point of view of a number
of teams. Yet it is interesting to note that these are the very teams
that have had no adequate forward pass defense.

Thus far most teams have trusted to luck against the forward passing
game. The inefficiency and mechanical errors of its offense, aided by
the restrictive legal measures adopted, have conspired to make this
possible. Signs are not lacking, however, to indicate a greatly
increased use of the passing game, an improved understanding and
appreciation of its fundamental principles and a much greater degree of
success for it. The defense for the forward pass will need to be studied
with great care in the immediate future.

The writer does not pretend to have solved this problem. His interest
has been rather on the other side. The following suggestions are offered
simply as a beginning:

First, "hurry the pass." Some man or men, not the entire line, should go
through and force the pass at the earliest possible moment, downing the
passer, blocking the pass or forcing it to be made before the eligible
men are ready or the passer has been able to locate them. This greatly
increases the chance of mechanical failure. Generally this should be
done by the ends. Some teams send the tackles in also. Some send tackles
in and have the ends wait. This frequently helps against the pass but
makes end running very easy.

Second, block eligible men. This of course can only be done before the
pass is made. But there is often an appreciable time before the pass is
made when eligible men could be blocked on the line of scrimmage. This
is the best work of the center trio rather than charging through.

Third, play a zone defense having each defensive back cover an area and
play the ball coming into that area rather than attempt to follow
individually eligible men.

Fourth, use the open defense (Fig. 5); that is, play the center out of
the line and with the full back about three yards behind tackle. This
defense is supposed to make center bucking easy, but it does not if the
defensive line is properly coached. This first line of secondary defense
is in position to intercept short passes or to help stop eligible men on
the scrimmage line. They are also in the best possible position to
assist on outside tackle and end runs while still in position to block
center bucks. In the judgment of the writer this is the best all-round
defense yet devised for the modern open game of football.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Open Defense.]

The open defense should be played as follows: Guards play to the center,
low, hard and stalling, not knifing through. Tackles fight their way
into the play through opposing end. Ends play as close as possible,
often not over two yards outside their own tackle and tear into every
play smashing the interference and hurrying passes. Center and full play
about three yards behind tackle, usually a trifle inside and wait until
they diagnose the play, then meet it. These men must be the best
tacklers on the team and fast, for if the tackles and ends accomplish
their work these men have their opportunity. Backs play from seven to
ten yards back and nearly straight behind end. Quarter or safety man
should play as close as he dares to, considering the possibility of
quick punts. This may be generally closer than most quarters play.

The defense with spread formations and for special plays is still too
much a matter of individual opinion to be discussed here.




  BASEBALL NOTES FOR
  COACHES and PLAYERS

  BY ELMER BERRY

  FOOTBALL AND BASEBALL COACH
  INTERNATIONAL Y. M. C. A. COLLEGE
  SPRINGFIELD, MASS.


  _REVISED EDITION_


  A practical handbook on the game of baseball, arranged
  in outline note form so that the book may become truly
  a useful repository of baseball knowledge and practice.


  CONTENTS

    BATTING
    BUNTING
    BASE RUNNING AND STEALING
    POSITION PLAY
    OFFENSIVE TEAM PLAY
    DEFENSIVE TEAM PLAY
    BATTERY STRATEGY
    TRAINING A COLLEGE TEAM
    ORGANIZED BASEBALL

  8vo cloth, illustrated with cuts and diagrams of actual play.
  Interleaved with blank pages for notes, etc. Price $2.00

  A. S. BARNES & CO., _Publishers_
  NEW YORK




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "STANDAND" corrected to "STANDARD" (dedication)
  "it" corrected to "is" (page 9)
  "Springfifield" corrected to "Springfield" (page 12)
  "diconcerting" corrected to "disconcerting" (page 14)
  "addidtion" corrected to "addition" (page 14)





