








[Illustration: GREEDINESS.]

[Illustration: TOOTH PULLING.]


DOCTOR BOLUS

AND

HIS PATIENTS.

[Illustration]

TROY, N. Y.
MERRIAM, MOORE & CO.




[Illustration]

DOCTOR BOLUS AND HIS PATIENTS.


Old Doctor Bolus was an old fashioned Doctor, and every morning started
out with his cane, to visit his patients, sometimes taking with him his
student, a man who had taken to studying medicine at thirty years old, in
the hope of being the successor of Doctor Bolus.

[Illustration]

We will follow the Doctor's rounds for one morning. First he called at the
Squire's, whose father was sick. The Doctor examined his tongue, felt his
pulse, and mixed a white powder and a gray powder, giving directions for
him to take a little every two hours. Then, after talking over the state
of the crops with the Squire, he went on to his next patient, old black
John, the colored man. John was very poor, but a good Quaker had relieved
his wants and the Doctor gave him a dose of calomel, telling him he would
soon be at work again.

[Illustration]

The Doctor's next call was to see little Kitty Green, the merchant's
daughter; Kitty had meddled with a sharp knife, and cut her finger pretty
severely; if she had been a poor man's daughter it would have got well
without the doctor, but rich people can afford to call the doctor for
little things, so Doctor Bolus applied some salve to Kitty's finger, and
she was soon playing again.

[Illustration]

The next patient was Mrs. Droley, who always imagined she was sick, and
had been one of the Doctor's regular patients for several years; and if a
few days passed without his calling on her, he was sure to be sent for.
Mrs. Droley kept her room and her bed much of the time, thinking she had
only strength to feed her cat. The doctor could not do her much good, but
gave her a little harmless medicine.

[Illustration]

The last call the Doctor made before his dinner, was at Mrs. Smith's. She
had been sick for a long time, and a few months before this her husband
had been drawn in to commit a robbery, for which he was sentenced to
imprisonment for life. She was rapidly failing, and would soon die. She
had mourned only that she must leave her little daughter destitute, but
was now assured that a good home was provided for Mary by her friends; and
she felt that she could die happy.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

DOCTOR BOLUS AFTER DINNER.


After dinner Doctor Bolus went to visit a very poor woman, who was sick
with a lung fever, and all alone, only when a colored girl came in to help
her, or to read to her. The Doctor knew he could not cure her, and only
gave her a little medicine to soothe her pain.

[Illustration]

His next visit was to Susan Blake, a little girl of ten years old, who was
very sick, and could not recover. She had one sister, and they were
orphans. It was hard indeed for them to part, but they both knew that
death would soon separate them.

[Illustration]

Doctor Bolus was next called to pull a tooth for a little girl, (see
frontispiece,) and then went to see Joe Glutton as he was called. Joe well
deserved the name for his greediness; a day or two before he had slily
climbed up to a dish of sweetmeats, and eaten very freely of them; that
night he was taken severely sick, and was obliged to take much bitter
medicine. This was not the first time he had suffered for his greediness.
The Doctor had a fine pear tree which was often robbed; when the pears
were ripe, he had inserted emetics in several of the finest of them, and
soon after was called to visit Joe, who had been suddenly taken with
vomiting; the Doctor soon relieved him, but found he had been eating his
pears.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

The next place was at the carpenter's, where the baby and the grandfather
were both sick. The grandfather was a very old man, and loved to tell over
the story of his settling in the wilderness, when a young man. The Doctor
left medicine for them, and then went on to Mrs. Thorn's whose daughter
was sick. He found the mother spinning, and the daughter trying to sew as
she lay on the bed. Mrs. Thorn's husband and six children had died with
consumption, and now the last, and youngest, on whom the mother had
depended for aid, was wasting away with the same disease. The mother
grieved deeply, but was cheerful, and said she hoped to meet them in
heaven.

[Illustration]

Next he called to see a little girl who had been sick for several days
with a violent fever; he had been afraid she would die, but now found her
better, and the danger past. Her brother was standing by her, trying to
draw her attention to a brood of chickens which had been hatched since she
was shut up by sickness.

[Illustration]

The Doctor had now finished his calls; but as he was walking home he was
called to a young lady who had been with a party of young people, sailing
on the pond, and in reaching over too far had fallen into the water. The
party were frightened, and it was sometime before she was taken out. The
Doctor tried for several hours to restore her, but it was in vain; she was
dead, and the whole village mourned over the sudden and sad death.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

DANGEROUS LEAP.


The above is a correct sketch of a young man on horseback leaping from a
bridge, at Egremont. The bridge was twenty feet high, but neither horse
nor rider sustained serious injury. Men after escaping great dangers are
often killed by slight causes.

"An earthquake may be bid to spare
The man that's strangled by a hair."




[Illustration: BROTHER AND SISTER.]

[Illustration: THE DEATH BED.]

JOHN AND JANE, THE TWO ORPHANS.


[Illustration]

John and Jane were the children of an Englishman. When they lived in
England they were well off, and were well taught by their mother, who took
much pains to lead them in the right way, and to teach them how they might
be happy here and hereafter. They lived in a pretty cottage near the sea
shore, where they could sometimes hear the waves dash against the rocks in
a storm. They played together, ate their meals together, sometimes sharing
them with the cat; they often walked together, and frequently rode out
with their father and mother.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

When Jane was ten years old and John eight, their father lost most of his
property, and decided to go to America with his family. They crossed the
ocean safely, but soon after they arrived in America their father and
mother were both taken sick, and after being sick, the father for a few
days, and the mother for several weeks, both died; the little property
they left was seized by their landlord, and John and Jane were left
entirely destitute and alone.

[Illustration]

Jane knew they had an uncle in a town in Ohio, and they had no other way
but to beg their way to him. They traveled several hundred miles on foot
to Ohio, begging their way; at first, in the city and until they had
traveled to a distance from it, people were often unkind to them; they
went ragged, frequently hungry, and sometimes found it very difficult to
learn their way; but after they got into the country towns many pitied
them, and not only gave them food, but supplied them with clothes, and
took pains to direct them on their way to the place where their uncle
lived.

[Illustration]

At last they reached their uncle's; they were kindly received, and their
uncle adopted them as his own children. Their sufferings were then at an
end; but they never forgot their sorrowful journey, nor the good things
their mother had taught them in their pleasant home in England, and tried
not only to remember but to obey her teachings.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE WELCH MOUNTAIN BOY.


"He fixed his crow-bar, attached his cord to it and descended the face of
the rock. Busily employed in gathering samphire, the rope suddenly dropped
from his hand." The above is a description of a boy in a most dangerous
situation, his only chance of escape being to dart out at the rope and
catch it in his hand.




[Illustration: THE TRUANT.]

GEORGE DENTON, THE TRUANT.


George Denton was a bad boy, and was constantly getting himself or others
into trouble. One afternoon, when sent to school, he played truant, and
started for a walk, ready for any mischief that might come to his hand.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

He first went into a grove not far from the school house, where one of the
school boys had showed him a bird's nest, which George promised him he
would not disturb. Not regarding his promise, he now climbed the tree and
got the nest, which contained several young birds; then, not knowing what
to do with the nest, he sat under a tree and held it for a little while,
but getting tired of this, and not knowing what to do with it, he left it
in the bushes where the young birds would perish. He then went to find
James, another bad boy with whom he often played, and with whom he had
many times planned mischief.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

On his way he passed a field where a number of reapers were engaged in
cutting the grain; coming to a spot where they had left their jackets, he
removed one of them and hid it under a bush thus obliging the owner to
make a long search for it after he had finished his day's work. He found
James, and with him two other boys; they were just starting to rob an
orchard, and James went with them; they got their pockets full of fruit,
and the other boys then left them. George and James sat under a tree by
the brook, eating their fruit, till they saw an old crazy man near them,
trying to cross the brook on a tree that had been laid across it. The boys
jumped on the tree and shook it to frighten him; but James willing to
frighten George as well as the old man, slily tripped him into the water,
and then ran away.

[Illustration]

George was frightened and very angry, but scrambled out of the water, and
wandered about for an hour or two in his wet clothes, fearing to go home,
and wishing he had gone to school. At last he started for home; a carriage
passing him, he jumped up behind it for a ride, but soon received a severe
blow from the driver's whip. He then hurt himself in jumping off the
carriage, but soon reached home, wet, tired, lame and dirty, and received
a severe punishment from his father.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

THE LOTTERY.


Above you have a picture of the drawing of a lottery. The wheels are
turned to mix up the numbers; a boy then draws a number from one wheel,
and then another boy draws from another wheel a blank or prize as it may
be. This is a sort of gambling, and many lads have begun with buying a
ticket in some little lottery, and from that been led on to shame,
disgrace and ruin.




[Illustration: FORTUNE TELLER.]

[Illustration: THE BEGGAR.]

LONG JAKE, THE ENGLISH BEGGAR.


[Illustration]

Jacob Longley, or 'long Jake,' as he was afterwards called, was born in
London. His parents were beggars, and they trained Jacob to their
business. When very small he was sent out with an older sister that he
might learn how to beg. When a little older, he was sent alone; sometimes
in rags, to get charity by his raggedness, at other times well dressed, to
tell a story of sickness and suffering at home. If not successful in
getting money, he was made to go without his supper, and sometimes beaten.

[Illustration]

Poor Jake was never taught that lying was wrong, but was praised if he
could get money by an artful story, and did not know that begging was any
more dishonorable than working. How thankful ought those children to be
who are taught what is right, while so many others are taught to do wrong.

[Illustration]

When Jake grew older, he became very expert in learning how to frame and
tell a tale of wo, and how to assume an appearance of want. In this
country we see little of the deception practised by beggars in other
countries. The appearance of feebleness or lameness is put on, a leg is
sometimes doubled up and a wooden leg substituted for it, deafness and
blindness are assumed, and many other arts are resorted to, to move the
charitable feelings of the benevolent.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

When Jake became a man he continued to beg, assuming more and more the
appearance of misery; sometimes professing to be a soldier, or a wrecked
sailor, sometimes pretending to have lost all he had by fire, sometimes to
have been disabled by a long sickness. Sometimes he appeared to be a very
old and infirm man, but when teazed by rude boys they would learn to their
sorrow that he could run after them very rapidly, and lay his staff over
them with heavy blows; but directly would appear a feeble old man again.
Jake gained a living without work, but it was but a poor living, in
ignorance, and sin, and often in want.

[Illustration]

At last he came in reality to be an old man, and a fit object of charity.
Too feeble to beg, he was sent to the workhouse; he had lived but a poor
life here, and died in ignorance of the way to secure happiness in the
life to come.




[Illustration]

THE DUNCE CAP.


We have here a picture of Miss Judith standing on the dunce block for not
learning her lesson. She did not soon forget it, nor soon fail again to
learn her lesson. The dunce block and dunce cap are now out of fashion;
perhaps if they were more used in school, we should have fewer grown up
dunces in the world.




[Illustration]

THE DRUNKARD.


"The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness
shall clothe a man with rags."--Prov. xxiii. 21.

  A pipe in mouth, a jug in hand,
    A haggard face and pale,
  A slovenly dress, a slouching gait--
    These tell the drunkard's tale.

  A dirty house, a weeping wife,
    Children inclined to roam,
  A cheerless hearth, an empty board--
    These mark the drunkard's home.

[Illustration]

  The vulgar song, the ribald jest,
    Confusion, slang, and noise,
  The cheating game, the madd'ning draught--
    These are the drunkard's joys.

  A wasted youth, a manhood lost,
    Old age without a friend,
  A workhouse, or, perhaps, a jail--
    Such is the drunkard's end.

  An angry Judge, a conscience raked
    Through endless years to come,
  A knawing worm that dieth not--
    Such is the drunkard's doom.




[Illustration]

CLEANLINESS, ITS ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES.


  A civil, quick, and steady lad
    Was wanting once a place,
  But nobody would hire him,
    He'd such a dirty face.

  In vain at waiting on the cook
    He showed his happy knack,
  For she declared against a boy
    Whose hands were always black.

  He tried to plead how quickly he
    Could heat and clean her oven,
  But she turned from him in disgust,
    And called him "dirty sloven."

[Illustration]

  Poor boy, I really felt for him,
    And longed to take him in,
  When, lo? another lad appeared,
    As neat as a new pin.

  And who could doubt between the two,
    He quickly lost all hope;
  Yet was the only difference
    Caused by a little soap.




[Illustration]

THE SABBATH.


  Welcome is the sabbath,
    With its holy rest,
  And its hours of worship
    By Jehovah blest.

  But 'tis quickly passing
    Soon it will be gone,
  Let us all improve it,
    While its sun rolls on.




[Illustration]

THE SAD CHANGE.


When Rufus was a little boy he behaved well, obeyed his parents, and was
kind to his sister. He used to go to school and to Sunday School with her,
and they studied their lessons together; but as he grew older he began to
get acquainted with bad boys, and preferred playing with them in the
street to playing with Maria at home. He is now a big boy, has learned to
fight, and thinks it manly to smoke a cigar and to swear. His father and
mother have taken a great deal of pains to induce him to break off his
evil habits, but if he follows his present course, he will become a bad
and miserable man, and be likely to come to an untimely end by accident or
the punishment of crime.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

YOUNG RICHARD.


  As Richard and his good Papa
  Were walking in the fields afar
    They passed a garden fence;
  A fence more rude than I should choose
  To guard my ripening vergaloos,
    From boyhood's tempting sense.

  Such fruit there hung in golden pride,
  Thicker than all the leaves could hide,
    All mellow, ripe, and sweet.
  Young Richard cast a longing eye,
  Complain'd that he was very dry,
    And suffering with the heat.

  "I'm thirsty too," said his papa;
  "I'm sorry that we came so far;
    But never mind, my son."
  "O see! papa, how many pears
  That tree within the garden bears!
    Pray let me go get one.

  I can be back here very quick;
  Just there the hedge-row is not thick;
    I'm sure I can get through it.
  The pear tree is not very high,
  A pole to knock them off is nigh,
    They will not see me do it."

  To which his father answer'd thus:
  "My son, they don't belong to us
    To take them would be theft--
  A wicked and degrading crime
  Which none can do at any time
    With a clear conscience left.

[Illustration]

  I am asham'd of such a thought;
  Remember what you have been taught
    The scriptures do declare,
  We must not steal--'tis clearly wrong
  To take what don't to us belong--
    I would not steal a pear.

  Such little things are Satan's traps:
  You might get thro' the hedge perhaps,
    And take a pear unseen--
  Except by that omniscient ONE
  Who knows thy very thoughts my son;
    From him there is no screen.

  God sees in secret; and he knows
  The schemes which sinful men propose,
    And strikes their heart with guilt.
  O'er such his righteous vengeance hangs,
  Unless repentance ease their pangs,
    And faith on Jesus built."

  Touch'd with remorse at this rebuke
  Young Richard, with a downcast look
    And tears he could not hide,
  Felt every word his father said,
  Assenting bow'd his little head,
    And press'd him to his side.

  "It was a wicked thought," said he;
  "I would not do a robbery,
    Though none but God should know it.
  I see it in another light,
  And now I know it is not right;
    I'm glad I did not do it.

[Illustration]

  'Tis well I had a guardian,"--
  That instant started up a man
    Who lay behind the fence.
  The owner of this snug retreat
  Had sought repose from toil and heat,
    And now looked o'er from thence.

  Apprised of what had just occurr'd,
  (For all that passed he had overheard,)
    He thus address'd the lad:
  "Temptation comes in many a shape;
  Be thankful, child, for this escape,
    And for the advice you've had.

  You little know, that to preserve
  Those fruits which for my living serve,
    I had contrived a gin;
  And had you acted on your thought,
  You had infallibly been caught,
    And punish'd for your sin.

  'Tis well your father's timely care
  Preserv'd you from this dreadful snare,
    And taught you to refrain.
  If in his counsel you abide,
  A mightier Power shall be your guide,
    And great will be your gain.

  Remember long the lesson taught;
  Obey your parents as you ought;
    For vice is link'd with wo:
  And if their care your soul secures,
  I shall, for their sake and for yours,
    Rejoice that it is so.

[Illustration]

  The tenderness your manner showed,
  And care about offending God,
    Do my forgiveness claim;
  Freely you therefore shall partake,
  Of fruit, which I a present make,
    With neither fear nor shame."

  Then from the ground the pole he took,
  The pear tree's topmost branches shook,
    And filled young Richard's hat;
  His father too he kindly pressed,
  To eat, to enter, be his guest,
    And spend an hour in chat.

  "Our thanks, my friend, will not repay
  Such goodness," did the father say;
    "Permit my purse to do it."
  "By no means, sir," the man replied,
  "I am entirely satisfied;
    Freely accept the fruit."

  An hour was spent in friendly talk,
  The ramblers then pursu'd their walk,
    Blessing the good old man;
  And Richard long remember'd this;
  He seldom after did amiss:--
    Be like him--for you can.




[Illustration]

NEVER LOOK SAD


  Never look sad, nothing so bad
    As getting familiar with sorrow;
  Treat him to-day in a cavalier way,
    And he'll seek other quarters to-morrow.

  Long you'd not weep, could you but peep
    At the bright side of every trial;
  Fortune you'll find, is often most kind,
    When chilling your hopes with denial.

  Let the sad day carry away
    Its own little burden of sorrow,
  Else you may miss half of the bliss
    That comes in the lap of to-morrow.




[Illustration]

PEEVISHNESS.


George and his sister were generally good children, but sometimes they had
their little difficulties. One day they were playing together while their
mother was sewing, and both were peevish and fretful. Their mother spoke
to them several times, and at last placed one in each corner of the room,
giving each a rod to hold, and kept them there until their father came
home to tea. They remembered this for a long time.




[Illustration]

SWIMMING ON LAND.


Mr. Tibbs was afraid of the water, but having to take a journey in which
it would be necessary to cross the lake, he determined to learn to swim;
as he was afraid to go into the water, he placed a frog in a dish of water
by the table and spreading himself on the table imitated the motions of
the frog until he thought he had learned to swim, at least on the land.




[Illustration]

THE BEGGAR.


One morning when Sarah's mother had gone out and left her alone, a beggar
came to the gate where she was sitting, and asked for food. She gave him
some bread, as she thought her mother would do, if at home; he thanked
her, and as he ate it he wept bitterly, and told her that she reminded him
of happy days when he had happy children and a happy home, and was happy
in their love.




[Illustration]

THE FRANKLIN GLOBES,

Terrestrial and Celestial.

THE FRANKLIN GLOBES, 6 Inch.

 "     "       "     10 "


We invite the attention of dealers and teachers to the above new series of
Globes, manufactured by us. They are strongly made, highly finished, and
each Globe is put up in a handsome case.

By an improved and entirely new process of manufacturing, (the ball being
made of a material different from that heretofore used, and much better
for the purpose,) the result of a long course of study and experiment,
they are very much stronger than other Globes, and less liable to crack or
be broken by a fall or other accident. In this respect they are far
superior to any other Globes.

Another and very great improvement in these Globes is, the substitution of
a beautiful metallic frame in place of the wood frame heretofore used,
thus making it an ornamental article for the parlor, library, or school
room.

Each Globe, (excepting the parlor pattern, which is put up only in packing
cases,) is put up in a neat case, with lid secured by a catch; or at a
higher price in an ornamental black walnut case, secured with lock. The
case opens readily, so as to display the Globe, and so that it may be
conveniently used without taking it therefrom, and effectually protects it
from liability to accident and from dust: a great desideratum in the
school room. The Celestial Globe is put up in the same variety of styles.

They are printed on new plates, which are engraved in a superior manner,
giving the late changes and divisions, including the latest Arctic and
Australian discoveries.


MERRIAM, MOORE & CO.,

PUBLISHERS AND BOOKSELLERS,

No. 9 & 10 CANNON PLACE,

TROY N. Y.




JUVENILE BOOKS,

PUBLISHED BY

MERRIAM, MOORE & CO.,

TROY, N. Y.


*_THE SHERWOOD JUVENILES._*

*PRICE TWENTY CENTS.*

I. Stories about Henry and Frank.--II. The Walk, the Visit, and other
Stories.--III. Frank's Adventures at Home and Abroad.--IV. The Loss, the
Recovery, and other Stories.--V. The Doctor and his Patients.--VI. Allen
Crane, the Gold Seeker.


*_THE MILNER TOYS._*

*PRICE SIX CENTS.*

I. Master Henry's Arrival.--II. Master Henry's Lesson.--III. Master
Henry's Walk.--IV. Master Henry's Visit--V. Master Henry's Green Bag.--VI.
Master Henry's Rabbit.


*_THE EDGEWORTH TOYS._*

*PRICE SIX CENTS.*

I. Frank and the Garden.--II. Frank and the Cottage.--III. Frank and the
Farmer.--IV. Frank and the Cherries.--V. Frank and the Kite.--VI. Frank
and the Cousin.


*_THE VERNON TOYS._*

*PRICE FOUR CENTS.*

I. Rhoda Green, the Sailor's Widow.--II. John White and his Lottery
Ticket.--III. James Brown and the Horses.--IV. Louis Bond, the Merchant's
Son--V. Norah Dean, the Widow's Daughter.--VI. George Bell, the Farmer's
Boy.--VII. Edna Jane, the Careless Child.--VIII. The Child's Gem.




